DGMS (Tech.) Circular No. 05 of 2020, Dhanbad, dated 24.02.2020
Government of India, Ministry of Labour & Employment, Directorate General of Mines Safety
To: All Owners, Agent, and Managers of Oil/Gas Mines.
Subject: Safe Conduct of Drilling and Production operations in Oil & Gas Mines.

Recently, there has been a spate of several fatal/serious accidents in oil/gas mines/installations,
caused mainly due to sudden ignition/fire of surcharged HC gas cloud in the area. While the enquiry
into these accidents revealed several shortcomings as the root cause, there still appeared many
areas for enhancing work-procedures to completely avoid such accidents.

Accordingly, the matter was discussed with various senior representatives from various oil/gas mines,
OISD in addition to officers from DGMS, for evaluating risk factors associated with such operations in
oil & gas mine(s) by on-site examination and study of various procedures in vogue, measures & type of
safety features/equipments in use during various processes of production & drilling operations.
Subsequent to holding detailed deliberations and discussions with various stake holders, the following
guidelines are framed for ensuring safe conduct of drilling and production operations in oil/gas mines.

A.1 - General:-

1. In every mine, personal Supervision of the mine or part of the mine shall be exercised by the
Manager at least once in every week to see that safety in every respect is ensured. He shall also
ensure to carry out at least one inspection of complete installation at every new location. Of these
inspections, one at least in every fortnight shall be made during the night shift.

2. Every company shall have defined HSE Policy for the hiring of services. The technical
qualifications as well as competency of the persons to be employed by the hiring agencies shall be
evaluated before deployment.

3. The qualifying criteria based on HSE policy or standards/guidelines of the company for hiring of
services and/or equipment/Rig, etc. shall be framed by the Owner/Agent/Manager before awarding the
Contract.

4. Qualification and competency of all contractual persons employed or to be employed in the mine
shall be evaluated by the board constituted by the management (i.e. owner/Agent/Manager) of the mine,
who shall be persons who are not connected with imparting of training, provided that the training
officer may be co-opted in the board as observer.

5. In case of well-defined sequential procedures involving multiple operating groups at any given
work site, a system of obtaining electronic permits/clearances for the sequential operations, shall be
installed and also implemented to effectively preventing bypassing the sequence, thereby avoiding
cropping-up of hazards as a consequence.

6. It shall be ensured that persons deployed within 30 m of any tank, separator, oil well, oil/gas
manifold in the installation including Zone-2 hazardous area(s), do not carry/possess mobile phones
and electronic device, cigar, cigarette, biri/other smoking apparatus or any match or kind which is
capable of producing a light, flame or spark, except intrinsically safe apparatus or such device which
are housed in a flame proof enclosure.

7. It shall be ensured that the entire process area and/or drilling area is kept under intrinsically
safe effective CCTV surveillance to monitor all operations closely. Recording of all such surveillance
shall be stored for a period of at least 30 days. Before deleting the data, it shall be examined for
unsafe act/practice. If any abnormality is observed, the same shall be rectified and recorded in a
bound paged book kept for the purpose.

8. Record of every inspection, testing, examination of any apparatus, equipment, controls, machinery,
system or any part of the installation shall be maintained in the bound paged book kept for the
purpose. The record shall be signed by the person(s) making such inspection, testing, and examination
and be countersigned by the installation Manager/Dy. Manager/Manager.

A.2 - General (Machinery & Equipment):-

9. In an area where flammable gas concentration is found or likely to contain in excess of the limit
as specified in Regulation 95(2) of the Oil Mine Regulations 2017 (OMR-2017), the area shall be
cordoned/fenced off and no person shall enter into such area. Provided that only competent person with
all provisions of life saving rescue apparatus and equipment may be allowed to enter into such area(s)
for the purpose of detection and control, subject to the condition that the flammable gas concentration
does not exceed the lower limit of explosion. Any vehicle/internal combustion engine without air intake
shutoff valve, spark arrestor and without proper insulation of exhaust pipe, catalytic convertor & such
other hot components of the equipment shall not be allowed in such area.

10. All machinery and equipment deployed in the mine shall be inspected at least once in a week by the
competent person(s) appointed for the purpose to ensure its safe working and also to ensure that
machinery being maintained as per OEM guidelines and strictures and statute of Oil Mines Regulations,
2017. Record of all such examination shall be kept maintained at the site.

11. Where compressed air operated starter of IC engine is not provided, the starter and the battery
shall be housed in flame proof enclosures.

12. It shall be ensured that suitable protective systems, such as automatic fire detection and
suppression system (AFDSS), engine coolant temperature sensor, engine oil pressure gauge, over heating
tripping system and exhaust manifold and turbo charger guards, are provided and maintained on every IC
engine. It shall also be ensured that the exhaust of every IC engine including exhaust pipe, muffler/
silencer, are adequately insulated/protected to prevent contact with inflammable fluids.

13. At every new location, before commencement of production/drilling activities, a pre-commissioning
audit of all the equipments shall be carried out by a HSE team and the deficiencies, so observed shall
be rectified before commencement of production/drilling activities. A record of the same shall be kept
available at the Installation for reference and shall be produced to the Inspecting Officer, whenever
required.

14. Diesel engine of fixed/mobile vehicles used in hazardous area shall be provided with a readily
accessible air intake shut off valve, in addition to the remote controlled provided where a diesel
engine is located within 30 m of a well as per the Regulation 97(3)(a) of OMR, 2017.

B.1 - Production Operations (On-site Requirement):

15. The abstract of operating instructions, emergency shutdown (ESD) procedure, ESD Trip set pressures
shall be displayed/made available in the control room and near all important operating equipment in
local language or language known to majority.

16. A system for continuous monitoring and detection of hydrocarbon gas with alarm system shall be
provided and maintained at production manifold, gas injection manifold, gas separator/scrubber area,
all fired heaters areas including heater treater, bath heater, indirect heater areas, flare knockout
drum area and other areas as determined by manager for the purpose. In addition, monitoring by portable
spot gas detection system on hourly basis or at shorter intervals as may be decided by the manager
shall be carried out and a record of such monitoring/detection by portable spot gas detection system
shall be kept in register kept for the purpose and shall be signed and dated by the person making the
measurement and countersigned by the Installation Manager. In case of the continuous monitoring and
detection system, the measured reading for at least 30 days shall be kept in distinct non-editable
electronic form.

17. Intrinsically safe internal communication system, like paging, walkie-talkie & mobile phones shall
be provided at strategic locations for the purpose of effective communication.

18. An Alarm Management System shall be established to ensure that all the alarms are monitored,
analysed, segregated and acted upon so that all the operational parameters are well within the
permissible limits.

19. Pneumatic or electronic operated Emergency shutdown (ESD) valve to shut off fuel/gas supply in
fired heaters, heater treater and bath heaters for quick response, in case of any emergency, shall be
provided and maintained.

20. Exhaust pipe of any burners (fired heaters, heater treater, bath heater, etc) shall be thermally
insulated.

B.2 - Production Operations (Pipelines):

21. Detailed Layout plan(s)/part plan(s) of all pipelines & their network, connected to production
Installation showing clearly the size, length, identification code & purpose, shall be prepared on a
suitable scale, maintained and kept available at the mines in addition to the plans maintained under
Regulation 9(1) of the OMR-2017. The plan shall be accurate and updated whenever any pipeline is
laid/replaced/removed.

22. Records of pipeline data, containing design data and as laid drawings shall be maintained at
respective Installation. Operating conditions of pressure/temperature and dozing shall be prepared for
each and every pipeline with suitable controls.

23. It shall be ensured that persons engaged in operation and maintenance possesses adequate knowledge
and experience to ensure functioning of the pipelines in a safe and efficient manner.

24. If a pipeline system is de-rated to a lower operating pressure in lieu of repair/replacement or
reduction in pipe wall thickness, the new MAWP (Maximum Allowable Working Pressure) shall be
determined.

25. Records of all operational activities for pipelines shall be kept and maintained. All pipelines
operations & maintenance including detection of leakage, repair, laying and replacement shall be
carried out by the person authorised for the purpose under the supervision of an official/competent
person(s), carrying adequate safety devices including portable gas detector and arrangement of Fire
Fighting.

26. The persons engaged in operation shall maintain vigilance for detection and control of any
leakages. At least three portable gas detectors, duly calibrated, shall be kept available and
maintained at Installations to monitor the leakage.

27. Any reported leakage of any pipeline shall be immediately investigated/examined by competent
person(s) authorized for the purpose and report of all such examinations and repair carried out
thereafter shall be recorded in a bound page book.

28. Persons likely to be affected shall be made aware about the hazards associated with the
Hydrocarbon pipeline(s) and suitable measures to be taken in case of observance of oil/gas leakages, at
periodic/regular interval.

29. The fire-fighting arrangements shall be made and kept readily available for immediate use while
detecting and repairing of hydrocarbon leakage.

30. Sections in pipelines where probability of water and/or solid accumulation is more shall be
identified and flagged. Such identified sections that are predicted to have highest susceptibility to
accumulation of corrosion causing substance and for longest residence time shall be assessed to have
highest likelihood of occurrence of internal corrosion.

31. If there is high number of leakages in the pipeline, then the pipeline shall be replaced on
priority.

32. On the basis of analysis of pipe line survey/measurement results, the competent person authorized
for the purpose shall declare a pipeline, whether it is 'fit for use'. The period of further use of
pipeline after every such test shall be clearly mentioned in the report. The residual life of all
pipelines arrived/based on recommended practice shall explicitly be recorded in terms of years &
months.

33. Non-destructive Testing of all Pipeline(s) shall be carried out to detect cracks, fissures,
metallurgical degradation besides physical deterioration such as loss in thickness, pitting etc. Ultra
sonic/Non-destructive Testing of pipe wall thickness measurement shall be carried out for both
underground as well as above ground pipeline sections once in every five years and records thereof
shall be maintained. The frequency of Ultrasonic Test inspection shall be increased as determined by
the manager depending upon the pipeline condition, leakage history and criticality of operation.

34. Valves on flow pipelines shall be tested and serviced once in every year in in-situ condition to
ensure in safe working order.

35. Calibrated pressure gauges & Pressure relief valves of each type used in mine shall be kept readily
available in spare in adequate numbers.

36. After Bean Pressure(ABP) of flowing wells shall be monitored on daily basis. If there is any
abnormal reduction or increase in ABP, investigation shall be carried out to ascertain the reason for
the same and corrective measures shall be taken.

37. Standing operating Procedures for rig-less logging of the well shall be prepared and implemented to
ensure safe operations.

38. Non-destructive testing & structural stability test shall be carried out for installation
structure(s) including flare structure which are susceptible to stress, corrosion and fatigue once in
every five years.

39. All equipment, plant, machinery and facilities system which are no longer in use shall be taken out
of service with all hazardous fluid removed from the system.

C. - Drilling Operations:

40. Detailed layout plan, on a suitable scale, of all the production/injection pipelines, power cables
and any other line connected with any production facilities shall be prepared and kept available, in
addition to the plan maintained under Regulation 9(1) of the OMR,2017 and a copy thereof shall be
provided to concern Installation Managers of the drilling & production operations.

41. Rig transportation, rigging-up and rig-dismantling operations shall be carried out under the
constant and close supervision of official authorized by the manager for the purpose.

42. During rigging-up and rig-dismantling operation, a suitable arrangement for anchoring of safety
belt and/or other suitable fall prevention devices, like mobile elevating work platform, shall be
provided.

43. In case of drilling activity inside an installation/at cluster location, prior to movement of the
rig, detailed risk analysis shall be carried out to determine the additional risks that may arise due
to drilling rig related activities.

44. In a cluster well location, the drilling rig and equipment shall be suitably placed at safe
distance from a production/injection wells, X-mas trees, flow lines and injection lines to carry out
drilling activities in safe & efficient manner and protected to prevent from damage due to fall of
material during rig transportation, rigging-up and rig-dismantling operations.

45. Procedure for handing over/taking over including intervening activities of well shall be
documented.

46. Tubing tongs with proper locking arrangement shall be provided for making and breaking of tubing
connections.

47. A gas detector or explosimeter, connected to audio visual alarm near the driller's stand, shall be
provided and maintained at the riser mouth in addition to the detector provided at shale shaker.

48. Pressure gauges of hydraulic power tongs shall be provided at driller's stand for monitoring, in
addition to that provided at substructure of the rig.

49. It shall be ensured that every draw works is provided with fail safe braking system, so as to get
automatically applied in case of any pneumatic/hydraulic component failure.

50. Care shall be taken for ensuring that various SOP's made in connection with drilling operation
shall be in accordance with OMR 2017 and relevant OISD standards and guidelines issued from time to
time.

All Owners, Agents and Managers of the oil mines are therefore, advised to strictly comply with the
aforementioned guidelines for enhanced safety in their respective oil/gas mines.

(R. Subramanian), Chief Inspector of Mines and Director General of Mines Safety(O).
